Uh, you can try.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I think it's.
Yeah, it should be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it's to do with the way that the, um,
NOTE CONF
examples are displayed.
I mean, I think things should be fine.
NOTE CONF
Okay, uh, let me start.
Um, so today's today's music is, uh, is a is
NOTE CONF
a song called program in C, and, um, so C
if you don't know, it is a, or if you've
NOTE CONF
never heard of it, it's a programming language.
It's kind of the opposite of Haskell in the sense
NOTE CONF
of being extremely low level.
It's as low level as you can get without, uh,
NOTE CONF
you know, it's actually pretty much at the hardware level.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, that's kind of the alternative.
Uh, if you don't want, um, Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Listen to me.
All languages, it's a mess.
NOTE CONF
Programming in C is better than anything they got over
there.
NOTE CONF
The syntax is so much sweeter.
Where objects and subtypes play.
NOTE CONF
But feels like inheritance will only get in the way.
Admires this simple landscape efficiently dangerous.
NOTE CONF
No templates or fancy pitfalls like Java and C plus
plus programming C programming C pointers.
NOTE CONF
Assembly.
Manage your memory with Malik and three.
NOTE CONF
Don't sync your app with runtime bloat.
Software and C will stay afloat.
NOTE CONF
Do what you want very close to the hardware program
in C.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's.
You may not have noticed, but it's the last thing.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, it it ended abruptly with a segmentation fault.
This is a this is an error you get when
NOTE CONF
you program in C and you make a mistake with
pointer arithmetic and that you try to, uh, you try
NOTE CONF
to address into areas of the memory you're not allowed
to use and you get segmentation fault standard crash and
NOTE CONF
see.
So that song crashed with a segmentation fault.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, uh, what I want to talk about today is
NOTE CONF
search and trees.
Uh, and this is not a lecture about Haskell and
NOTE CONF
new features and so forth.
It's about I'm using Haskell as a vehicle to talk
NOTE CONF
about, um, uh, the problem of tree search, which is
a kind of a basic thing in, in computer science
NOTE CONF
and also in artificial intelligence.
So searching through, uh, tree, um, and my trees are
NOTE CONF
going to represent search spaces, so you can think of
them as something like the search space of a chess
NOTE CONF
game or something like that.
Uh, where, um, where you've got, um, branching, representing the
NOTE CONF
different moves you have from a particular position in chess,
let's say, or some other game.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're going to be we're going to be looking
NOTE CONF
at trees and they're going to be binary trees, but
they're not going to be the binary trees.
NOTE CONF
I mean, they're going to look the representation will be
uh, again using nodes and empty trees and so forth
NOTE CONF
as you're familiar with.
But these trees are not going to obey the invariant
NOTE CONF
that I, that I talked about before about the, the,
the labels being ordered, uh, according to, you know, um,
NOTE CONF
yeah.
You know, we always had node, node label and then
NOTE CONF
everything on the, uh, on the left.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
On the right.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
From your point of view, uh, everything on the left
being smaller than the node level and everything on the
NOTE CONF
right being larger than node label.
So forget that it's going to be, uh, labelled binary
NOTE CONF
trees with integer labels.
But, um, forget about that invariant.
NOTE CONF
I'm just using this to represent, um using this represent
search spaces.
NOTE CONF
Um, so arbitrary labelled binary trees.
And here's an example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this, this uh, declaration you've seen before.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is, this is, uh, how you represent binary trees
NOTE CONF
in Haskell and, um, you know, with, uh, two kinds,
two constructors, nil for the empty tree and node for
NOTE CONF
a tree that has a label, uh, and two subtrees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, here is an example of such a tree.
And in this, in this some in this form here,
NOTE CONF
this is how you'd write it in Haskell.
Um, it's kind of hard to read.
NOTE CONF
Here is the here is a picture of, of of
what I've, uh, defined here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's a node, uh, which has a label one.
NOTE CONF
There it is.
And then two subtrees.
NOTE CONF
The left one.
Uh, two at the top, four and five underneath.
NOTE CONF
And the other one with uh, three at the top
and left subtree.
NOTE CONF
Six.
Eight.
NOTE CONF
Nine.
That's here.
NOTE CONF
And right subtree has just a seven.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to be using these trees, as I
said to represent a search space.
NOTE CONF
And um, so think of the problem of uh, finding
a good move in a chess game or in a
NOTE CONF
go game or, um, imagine that you want to find,
uh, flight connections from here to somewhere far away, uh,
NOTE CONF
where there's no direct flight.
And so you need to find, uh, a sequence of
NOTE CONF
flights that will get you there.
Okay, so the the the nodes in the in the
NOTE CONF
tree Represent positions in chess or position in go or
airports in the, in this sort of aeroplane network search
NOTE CONF
space.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the the, the game you're playing is getting
from the root.
NOTE CONF
So this, this this, this thing at the top of
the tree.
NOTE CONF
Remember, trees in computer science grow downwards instead of upwards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So getting from the root via some sequence of of
of moves or branches to a node.
NOTE CONF
That's one that you're looking for.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the problem is searching for a node that has
some property.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I've simplified the problem as much as I can.
NOTE CONF
We've got binary trees.
Um meaning that from every node there's only two possible
NOTE CONF
moves.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's like an airport that only has two possible flights
or a chess game that only has two possible moves
NOTE CONF
from each position.
Of course, that's not the way it is, but it
NOTE CONF
keeps things simple to just consider that case, okay?
And at the at the at the labels, instead of
NOTE CONF
having complicated things like names of airports or chess positions,
I'm just using integers because that's going to be good
NOTE CONF
enough for the examples I'm going to do.
Okay, but you could imagine these trees being, you know,
NOTE CONF
more than binary and um, and with more information at
the nodes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you've got the sort of situation that I'm, that
NOTE CONF
I'm talking about here, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And we're, and we're looking, we're looking for a node
that has a particular property.
NOTE CONF
And so this is a, this is a, this is
a tree, an example of a tree.
NOTE CONF
And we can also have infinite trees.
And here is an example of an infinite tree.
NOTE CONF
You can define it like this in Haskell.
And um the, the numbers in this tree.
NOTE CONF
I've defined them this way, because that happens to be
useful for examples that I'm going to be showing you
NOTE CONF
later.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But of course you can define trees with other numbers
in them okay.
NOTE CONF
The code here is not particularly interesting.
So I'm going to be kind of skipping through it
NOTE CONF
pretty quickly.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But here is the picture that you'd get from from
this definition okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's a it's a binary tree with numbers at
the nodes.
NOTE CONF
And if you go down if you go down here
you get negative numbers.
NOTE CONF
If you go down here you get positive numbers.
And there's mixtures in between here okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So finite trees and infinite trees.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I have a tree and I want to find
NOTE CONF
a node that satisfies a given property okay.
And the property I'm going to express as a as
NOTE CONF
a predicate.
So it's a function from node labels to boolean okay.
NOTE CONF
If a if I find a node label that satisfies
the property.
NOTE CONF
It means that, um, that applying that predicate to the
node label gives me true, otherwise it gives me false.
NOTE CONF
So this is the problem I've got I've got a
tree and I've got a property.
NOTE CONF
And I want to find a node, label a node,
a node that satisfies that, that property.
NOTE CONF
So um.
Here is an example of doing a search.
NOTE CONF
Uh this is called breadth first search.
I'll explain why, but let's look at the type.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Well it requires equality because I happen to be using
equality here.
NOTE CONF
I could have written it without equality, but then it
would be a bit longer.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the important part of the type is, is
this bit.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I supply a predicate.
So this is the thing which is, um, uh, telling
NOTE CONF
what is I'm looking for.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The property that I'm looking for, uh, the second argument
is the tree that I'm looking forward in.
NOTE CONF
And then the result.
Remember this type?
NOTE CONF
Maybe.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This was the the type.
It's a it's a algebraic data type built into Haskell
NOTE CONF
used to represent, um, uh, values that may or may
not be present.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I used it for, um, optional arguments of functions and
NOTE CONF
optional results of functions or.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so the idea is that, um, this, this search,
NOTE CONF
it might be that there is no label that, that,
that has that property, okay.
NOTE CONF
In which case we can't return one.
And so we return the result.
NOTE CONF
Um, nothing.
Here's the, here's the, the the result if you get
NOTE CONF
if you if you search fails.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you find one then you return it.
But you have to wrap it up with a constructor
NOTE CONF
called just.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here is, uh, kind of returning a successful, uh,
result of a successful search.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, just in case you've forgotten, that's what
this type here is for.
NOTE CONF
For optional in this case, optional results.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Results that may or may not.
You may or may not have a result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is code which, uh, which does a
search.
NOTE CONF
Um, it looks at a node.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If, if there's nothing in the tree, um, then, uh,
then I return nothing because there is nothing that I
NOTE CONF
can return.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if I've got a node, I look to see
whether that property that I'm looking for is, uh, satisfied
NOTE CONF
for this node.
If it is, then I return it as the answer.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise I looked in the left subtree.
If it's not, if I don't find anything there.
NOTE CONF
This is the failure of the of the search.
Then I look in the right subtree.
NOTE CONF
Um, if, however, the result of looking in the left
subtree gives me a result, then I return it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, uh, that's this is just a repetition
of of this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so the code is not that important here.
NOTE CONF
Um, what's important is, uh, the search, the kind of
search that I'm doing.
NOTE CONF
This is called depth.
First search and let me draw some pictures.
NOTE CONF
It's called depth first search, because the order in which
it looks through the tree to find, um, to find.
NOTE CONF
Uh, a label, uh, that it's that is looking for.
So let me go back to my tree.
NOTE CONF
And draw a picture.
Okay, so you you you may or may not remember
NOTE CONF
my tree, but it looked like this.
Um.
NOTE CONF
You see that in the back, I hope.
Um.
NOTE CONF
By the way, I just.
I'll just go back to the definition of that tree.
NOTE CONF
That was this one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Actually, um, if I look at a node like this
NOTE CONF
one, I'm drawing it like this, but really, it looks
like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay, all of these, all of these kind of end
Nodes.
NOTE CONF
Really?
I should draw in the empty, uh, the empty nodes
NOTE CONF
underneath them.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
They don't, but they don't play any role in what
I'm going to say.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Depth first search.
What this means, what depth first search means is that
NOTE CONF
when we're looking for, um, uh, a node satisfying a
property, we're starting at the top.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're looking at that node.
NOTE CONF
Does it satisfy the property?
Um, so if the answer is no, then with depth
NOTE CONF
first search we always go down and to the left
to um to, to to look for the next thing
NOTE CONF
that we're going to be examining.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we go this way.
Um, and then we look at that one.
NOTE CONF
And then if that one doesn't satisfy the property, then
we go down into the left.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so forth.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So here we've come to the end.
NOTE CONF
We can't go down into the left anymore.
So depth first search.
NOTE CONF
When we're in that situation we we backtrack and go
to the right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Look at this one next.
NOTE CONF
If that doesn't satisfy the property then we backtrack.
In this case we have to backtrack two levels and
NOTE CONF
go to the right and look at that one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if that doesn't satisfy the property we go down
into the left down into the left and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the general rule is we're going down to the
NOTE CONF
left unless it's not possible to do anything else.
You've got a question.
NOTE CONF
That's the order of the cards.
Does the order.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'll just repeat that rather than, um, uh, throwing
you the cube.
NOTE CONF
The order of the guards.
Um, does it affect that?
NOTE CONF
Well, this is the test to see whether the place
I'm at is the is the right place.
NOTE CONF
The, um, the fact that I'm doing depth first search
or I'm, I'm pointing at the screen here, you can't
NOTE CONF
see that the fact that I'm doing, um, depth.
First search p of t one here, it's the t
NOTE CONF
the fact that it's t one that is, is saying
down into the left.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because t one is the left subtree.
NOTE CONF
And we're looking at we're going to be looking at
the top node of the left subtree.
NOTE CONF
And the backtracking part is is is here okay.
If I, if I have if I go down into
NOTE CONF
the left and I don't find a solution, then I
go, um, then I look, only then do I look
NOTE CONF
on the right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so that's, that's effectively the backtracking happening there.
I'm going to show you a different version of this
NOTE CONF
in a minute, which might possibly be clearer.
I'm not sure.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But the point of depth research is, is the order
NOTE CONF
in which it visits the nodes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Uh, so suppose that I'm looking for, um, here's here's
NOTE CONF
some pictures.
Suppose that I'm looking for something that's greater than four.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, going back to my diagram, it's shown here as
NOTE CONF
well on the screen up there.
But going back to my diagram, looking for something that's
NOTE CONF
greater than four okay.
One is is one greater than four.
NOTE CONF
No.
Go down here is two greater than four.
NOTE CONF
No.
Go down here is four greater than four.
NOTE CONF
No it's equal to four okay I okay then I
would actually go down here but there's nothing there okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, which is what, which is what causes the failure.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then I go up here.
Is five greater than four.
NOTE CONF
Actually, first I would go there.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Those didn't produce any interesting results, which is why I
sort of admit them in the previous picture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
After.
NOTE CONF
After here.
Um, so is five greater than four?
NOTE CONF
Yes it is.
That's the answer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if I was looking for something that was equal
NOTE CONF
to six, then I would go here and there and
there and there and then find it here.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
So that's depth.
First search, um, and you can express it in a
NOTE CONF
different way.
So the, the what I was doing here, I previously
NOTE CONF
spoken about traversals and how you can traverse a tree,
meaning you're visiting all the nodes in the tree.
NOTE CONF
And there are different kinds of traversals.
And what distinguishes them is the order in which you
NOTE CONF
visit the nodes.
So this is a depth first traversal that I'm doing
NOTE CONF
okay.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This order and so forth.
And I can actually express this depth first search in
NOTE CONF
terms of a depth first traversal.
So that's the code that I have at the bottom
NOTE CONF
here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's exactly the same result.
But I'm doing it this way because the other searches
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be showing you, I'll express them.
I mean the key is going to be the traversal
NOTE CONF
and the order in which the traversal does its work.
And the and the actual search algorithm is then the
NOTE CONF
only difference is going to be, uh, what kind of
traversal it uses.
NOTE CONF
So this is using a depth first traversal okay.
And depth first traversal.
NOTE CONF
It says, um, you know, uh, at every node I
look at the node label and then I look at
NOTE CONF
the left subtree And then I look at the right
subtree.
NOTE CONF
And of course looking at the left subtree means I'm
looking at everything in the left subtree starting from the
NOTE CONF
node at the top of the left subtree, and then
its left sub subtree, and then its right sub subtree,
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
Okay, so this this gives me the I think I
NOTE CONF
have a.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The traversal there traversal of this tree gives me the
nodes in the order of 124536897.
NOTE CONF
Which is what you get if you, if you work
this all out okay.
NOTE CONF
And then, and then doing the and then doing the
search.
NOTE CONF
This is the depth first search in terms of this
traversal.
NOTE CONF
So what it does it's it's very simple.
It it has a comprehension here which Which takes the
NOTE CONF
depth first traversal for every x drawn from that from
that list.
NOTE CONF
It checks to see whether um P holds or not.
Okay, so that's a guard.
NOTE CONF
So you get you get a list of all of
the of all of the, um, nodes that satisfy the
NOTE CONF
predicate.
Uh, with just wrapped around them because the result is
NOTE CONF
maybe is maybe a here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the result is the first one of those.
Except if this is if this list is empty, then
NOTE CONF
the result is nothing.
Meaning you didn't find anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm going kind of quickly through the code because
the code is not the main point.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um, and so you get the same result.
NOTE CONF
Um, you get the same result.
And, uh, because of lazy evaluation, uh, it means you
NOTE CONF
actually don't have to compute this entire list here in
order to.
NOTE CONF
In order to get the head you, you compute long
enough until you have at least one element, and then
NOTE CONF
and then you produce the head and you're finished.
Uh, you might have to produce you might have to
NOTE CONF
compute the whole list if the list is.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
If that list is empty, you have to compute the
NOTE CONF
whole thing to find out that it's empty.
And then the result is nothing.
NOTE CONF
So that corresponds to doing the entire going through the
entire tree.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, I have this, um, I've got a
multimedia presentation today with, uh, laptop and, um.
NOTE CONF
Drawing things and, uh, slides.
So let me see.
NOTE CONF
I've got this all of the code for this lecture
and all the code for all the other lectures you
NOTE CONF
can you can download.
And I want to show you this, um, running.
NOTE CONF
Uh, uh, so let me just, uh, load it in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I can do, um, that tree that I, that
I, that I showed you, it's called.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The tree is called T1.
NOTE CONF
Um, I haven't defined it with a show.
With a show, um, deriving show.
NOTE CONF
So it's not going to print it out for me,
but never mind.
NOTE CONF
That's what it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so I can do depth first.
Um, looking for greater than for in T1.
NOTE CONF
And it'll give me the result just five and I
can do uh, depth first Prime.
NOTE CONF
This was the alternative, um, way of writing this using,
uh, traversal.
NOTE CONF
And it will give me the same result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very exciting.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, And I could do this even on an infinite
tree.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Looking for something?
NOTE CONF
And now I'm going to look for something that's less
than, um, minus two in the infinite tree infos.
NOTE CONF
This infinite tree that I showed you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it finds, uh, minus three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, looking at my inventory, uh, minus three was was
right here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In depth.
NOTE CONF
First search finds it very quickly going down here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's depth first search.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, breadth first search.
NOTE CONF
So depth depth is about is about this direction getting
things deeper.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Things going deep.
NOTE CONF
The search goes deep.
It goes down into the left.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Breadth first search is, um, going across okay.
NOTE CONF
The order that this these nodes are visited in in
breadth first search is uh, is different.
NOTE CONF
Let me draw my tree again.
I'll leave out the nils to keep it a little
NOTE CONF
bit tidier.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
I need three screens.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, there's my tree again.
I'll leave out the nils.
NOTE CONF
Um, breadth first search proceeds.
Losing my voice proceeds from the top in layers.
NOTE CONF
Not not, uh, down into the left, but in layers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Top layer one node.
Next layer these two nodes.
NOTE CONF
Next layer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You see the difference obviously right.
That's in layers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is an alternative breadth first traversal.
NOTE CONF
Um so this was depth first traversal that you've seen
already.
NOTE CONF
Breadth first traversal.
Um here's a little program that computes that computes what
NOTE CONF
I just showed you there okay.
Um and so this is just a different order of
NOTE CONF
visiting the nodes.
So this one, if we do the depth first traversal
NOTE CONF
the order would be 12453679.
Sorry 36897.
NOTE CONF
Here it would be 123456789.
Okay, so, um, a breadth first search is exactly the
NOTE CONF
same program that I had a minute ago.
Um, for depth first search, except that instead of using,
NOTE CONF
uh, depth first traverse, I use breadth first traverse.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it just uses a different order of visiting the
the nodes.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, here's a slide showing it in action.
I'm going to skip that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll skip this.
Uh, I'll just show you it running.
NOTE CONF
So just a second.
Oh, dear.
NOTE CONF
How do I get this thing to, uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's depth.
First search.
NOTE CONF
I, uh, no, I wanted breadth first search.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Well, let me let me not do well, okay.
Let me let me do it.
NOTE CONF
Just because you're you're obviously, um.
Breadth.
NOTE CONF
Why is this not.
Oh, it's capital B.
NOTE CONF
You're obviously wanting to see if this works or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so breadth first, um, breadth first of of, uh,
you know, looking for something that's greater than for in
NOTE CONF
T1.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Again, we get the same answer, you know, no surprise
there.
NOTE CONF
Right.
because we're going we're looking for something greater than for.
NOTE CONF
So we go here, here, here, and we find it.
We find it right there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, okay.
So we got the same answer.
NOTE CONF
But that need not always be the case okay.
So suppose that we're looking for, um.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Oh you can't see.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
Thanks for everybody telling me that they can't see because
NOTE CONF
I.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's see, uh.
What's an example?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I mean, I'll just I'll just show it in
pictures.
NOTE CONF
Suppose that I'm looking for something that's, um.
Not equal to one, 2 or 4.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any other one would be okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um, so this would find five.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's the first one it visits that's not equal to
NOTE CONF
one, 2 or 4.
And this one would find three okay.
NOTE CONF
So they would both find a solution but they would
be different solutions okay great.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What's the difference okay.
NOTE CONF
They both find solutions.
They might find different solutions.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay Um, the the difference is in the infinite case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
For for infinite trees.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, so let me go back to my depth
first solution.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Depth first search can sometimes run forever when you, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you look at this infinite tree here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And you go with depth first search looking for a
NOTE CONF
node that's greater than zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What happens?
We start at the we start at the, at the
NOTE CONF
top and we go down into the left.
So is zero.
NOTE CONF
Is zero greater than zero.
No it isn't okay.
NOTE CONF
Is is minus one greater than zero?
No it isn't.
NOTE CONF
Is minus two greater than zero?
No it isn't.
NOTE CONF
Is minus three greater than zero?
No it isn't.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we keep going.
We'll never find anything that's greater than zero.
NOTE CONF
And this is an infinite tree.
So you'll go forever.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, I could show it you running, but it
NOTE CONF
would just not terminate.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And there's my two different implementations.
Uh, fail in different ways.
NOTE CONF
The first one, as it happens, it it fills up
the memory, and then you get this, uh, Stack Overflow
NOTE CONF
thing.
And the second one, Haskell cleverly realises that it can
NOTE CONF
do a version.
Uh, it compile can compile this in such a way
NOTE CONF
that it doesn't produce lots of stuff that consumes the
memory.
NOTE CONF
And so it just runs forever without having a stack
overflow.
NOTE CONF
In both cases, you never find anything that's greater than
zero because you're going down and down and down this
NOTE CONF
left branch forever Okay.
However.
NOTE CONF
Breadth first search.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Breadth first search visits just three nodes.
NOTE CONF
This one.
So it's going in layers.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
So that one, that one.
And then this one.
NOTE CONF
And it returns.
It returns that one okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's going in layers.
So here and then across and then across here and
NOTE CONF
then across here.
But it finds it already in this in this second
NOTE CONF
layer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So instead of running forever it finds it almost immediately.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's because um, the solution is in the right
subtree.
NOTE CONF
And so this strategy of going always to the left
is in this case the wrong one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And um.
Yeah, it's hard to.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it's all because the order in which the the
NOTE CONF
nodes are being visited are is wrong.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The, um.
So, so what this says is that sometimes depth first
NOTE CONF
search is better and sometimes breadth first search is better
in general.
NOTE CONF
Um, and they really differ a lot for infinite trees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in general depth first search doesn't always terminate.
Even if, even if you even if there is a
NOTE CONF
node in the tree that satisfies the property you're looking
for depth.
NOTE CONF
Breadth first search will always find it if it's there.
Um, but it might take longer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I mean, if the thing you're looking for is, is,
NOTE CONF
you know, level 20 down this left hand branch here,
um, depth.
NOTE CONF
First search will find it in 20 steps, whereas breadth
first search will have to visit every single one of
NOTE CONF
these layers.
It's about two to the 20th nodes that it'll have
NOTE CONF
to visit before it finds this thing.
That's that's way down, way down the left hand branch.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, and then the question is, can we do
NOTE CONF
better?
And the answer is yes sometimes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, uh, this is, uh, this is an area
NOTE CONF
called heuristic search.
And this is where it gets into sort of AI.
NOTE CONF
Um, so heuristic, uh, search is about, um, uh, using
information.
NOTE CONF
Well, in this case, it's about using information about the
problem to, um, to cleverly pick the way to go
NOTE CONF
next, rather than blindly always going down to the left
or always going in layers.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, instead of that, um, you imagine, um well,
let's start with with a sort of analogy.
NOTE CONF
So if this was a chess, if this was a
chess, um, search space where the branches are moves and
NOTE CONF
you're looking for a good move.
So how would you decide which is a good move?
NOTE CONF
Uh, you you don't kind of blindly search for it.
You look at the positions that you're that you're reaching,
NOTE CONF
whether there are good positions or not.
You want to make moves that put you in a
NOTE CONF
good position.
Or if you're looking for a flight from here to
NOTE CONF
Singapore, let's say, um, uh, it would make sense to
look for flights that go in the direction of Singapore.
NOTE CONF
You know, if there's no direct flight to Singapore, at
least it would be better to go from from Edinburgh
NOTE CONF
to Dubai or or, uh, you know, some place east
of here and not to New York, for example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, I mean, you can get to Singapore going that
NOTE CONF
way as well, but, um, uh, you know, anyway, it
makes sense to go in the direction of the thing
NOTE CONF
that you're, that you're trying to get to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so and so it isn't just a matter of
looking blindly, you know, left subtree or blindly layers, but
NOTE CONF
looking at the, the values at those nodes and using
that information to decide what to do next.
NOTE CONF
So this is um, something called best first search.
At least that's what I'm going to call it.
NOTE CONF
And um, the idea is to decide the order of
nodes to visit using an evaluation function.
NOTE CONF
So this evaluation function, which looks at the values in
the tree and picks the right node or picks, decides
NOTE CONF
which node to to visit based on what this evaluation
function gives you.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this code is a little bit complicated, but the
important thing here is the um, is the type I
NOTE CONF
guess.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So best first search.
It's going to take a predicate, which is um, the
NOTE CONF
uh, you know, it's the thing that we've had all
along.
NOTE CONF
This is, this is the, um, it tells you whether
you've you found something that you're looking for.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But in addition, we have this thing here.
NOTE CONF
This is the evaluation function.
And so this is going to take um, it's going
NOTE CONF
to take the, the the potential places to go okay.
Which are in this case going to be, uh, the
NOTE CONF
immediate subtrees of the place you are and it's going
to deliver, um, an integer result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Think of this as the, the quality or the value
NOTE CONF
of, of that subtree.
And I'm allowing it not just to look at the
NOTE CONF
node but to look at the whole subtree.
It might be like if it was a chess position,
NOTE CONF
you might want to look at the potential places you
could reach after 1 or 2 moves from that test
NOTE CONF
position.
Okay, so a little bit more general than just looking
NOTE CONF
at the at the label okay.
So otherwise it's the same as before.
NOTE CONF
You take a you take the, you know, the predicate,
uh, this is what you're looking for.
NOTE CONF
You've got the evaluation function.
You have the tree that you're looking in, and then
NOTE CONF
it will give you a result or maybe not give
you a result depending on whether it's there or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the idea.
NOTE CONF
And I won't go through this code because it's kind
of complicated.
NOTE CONF
And there's also I think there's another page of code.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Another page of code which implements something called priority queues.
But let me tell you what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I haven't talked much about different data structures, but
NOTE CONF
two data structures that you may have heard of are
stack and queue.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
A stack is the analogy is always used, like if
NOTE CONF
you're in a cafeteria and you have a bunch of
plates and you take the sort of top one off
NOTE CONF
the stack.
Um, so that's a stack of plates you put.
NOTE CONF
If you want to put more plates into the stack,
you put them on the top and it sort of
NOTE CONF
sinks down.
Everyone you put on the top is is causing it
NOTE CONF
sink down and when you take one off, it's the
last one that was put on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's called um, uh last in first out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then there's a Q, which is like, um, at
NOTE CONF
the, at the supermarket for the checkout or something like
that.
NOTE CONF
You get in the back.
This is if you're actually using, well, supermarkets with queues.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, you get in the last place and the,
NOTE CONF
the person who is next served is at the front
and that's called um, uh, first in, first out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, this is using something called a priority queue, which
NOTE CONF
is a variant on a queue, which is where the
things in the queue have values and it isn't it
NOTE CONF
isn't first in, first out or last in first out.
It's it's, uh, it's, uh, best is the first out.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so the things in the queue have values, and
the queue is arranged such that the things with the
NOTE CONF
best value are in the front.
And those are the ones that go out first, even
NOTE CONF
if the best ones are the ones that came in
last.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I'm not going to go through this code,
but there's code here for implementing a priority queue.
NOTE CONF
Um, and and this is code for best first search
that uses that priority queue.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's PQ standing for priority queue.
And there's um functions that insert things into priority queues
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can look at this code, um, in your
copious free time, um, if you, if you wish.
NOTE CONF
But that's what it's doing.
Um, the code for priorities queues is like, it's, it's
NOTE CONF
kind of like, um, uh, ordered trees from the earlier
lecture, but we're maintaining items in descending order according to
NOTE CONF
the result of the evaluation function.
Um, and getting stuff out of the tree uses these
NOTE CONF
functions top and pop.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So, for example, um, I could show you these things
running, but I think in the interest of time, I'll
NOTE CONF
just talk through these, okay?
This is what I would get if I would run
NOTE CONF
them on my computer, on my laptop.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this this, um, infinite tree.
I mean, the interesting thing is to look at infinite
NOTE CONF
trees, because these, these these tree that I have is
too small to be very interesting.
NOTE CONF
So this was the infinite tree that I had.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So just remember this tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, negative stuff down to the left.
Positive stuff down to the right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And let's suppose that my evaluation function, just to keep
NOTE CONF
things really simple All it does is return the node
label.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is really, really simple.
Um, and for the nil tree it returns zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, so using that using that evaluation function.
NOTE CONF
Um, well first of all breadth first search will find
will find uh, if I'm looking for something that's greater
NOTE CONF
than 19 it'll find it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Remember my my tree negative stuff down to the to
the left.
NOTE CONF
Positive stuff down to the right.
It'll eventually find something that's greater than 19.
NOTE CONF
It's a label with 20.
And it will.
NOTE CONF
It'll find it by going layer by layer.
And it'll find it in the 21st layer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and in order to get there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, if I run this on my laptop, it takes
about 10s and it had to look at 2 million
NOTE CONF
nodes to find it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because starting at the top, it's down here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Starting at the top it's going layer by layer by
layer by layer.
NOTE CONF
Each one is twice as long as the one before,
and eventually it finds it down here layer 21 okay.
NOTE CONF
But it finds it okay.
Best first search if if the evaluation function is the
NOTE CONF
value of the of the value of the node, it'll
find it in a 0.02 seconds.
NOTE CONF
And it only has to look at 21 nodes to
find it.
NOTE CONF
So let me just go back and look at this
tree quickly.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
It'll start here and it'll decide what what am I
NOTE CONF
going to do now?
I've got a node with a one and a node
NOTE CONF
with a minus one.
And so if my strategy is to take the one
NOTE CONF
with the evaluation function giving the largest value and the
value of the evaluation function is just the node, It's
NOTE CONF
going to go this way because one is greater than
minus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then at this point it's going to look at
NOTE CONF
these two branches.
And it's going to decide to go again to the
NOTE CONF
right because two is greater than zero and so forth
and so on.
NOTE CONF
It's going to go down this branch.
Keep going until it gets to the label 20 which
NOTE CONF
is on level 21.
Uh, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it'll find it and much more quickly okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it's doing this best, best first search.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Now, if I was looking for something that's greater than
100, and if I use breadth first search, it will
NOTE CONF
have to look through 100 layers, which it will find.
Uh, I don't know how long it would take on
NOTE CONF
my laptop, but it has to look at this many
nodes to get there.
NOTE CONF
That's a lot.
Okay, probably, uh, probably.
NOTE CONF
It would take too long to wait for it, I
don't know.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Because it's basically two to the 100th or two to
NOTE CONF
the two to the, uh, actually two to the 102
minus one I've got written down here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because top layer is layer zero and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's the 21st layer where the first one is zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that will take an awful long time.
NOTE CONF
It'll find it because breadth first search will always terminate
if the thing is there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But best first search just has to do um, it'll
NOTE CONF
go right down the, um, down this branch and find
it very quickly looking at 101 nodes to get there,
NOTE CONF
okay.
In almost no time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I mean, this was a very, very, um, uh,
NOTE CONF
kind of superficial look at this idea of heuristic search.
The thing about heuristic search is that the heuristics don't
NOTE CONF
always work okay.
The performance depends critically on the quality of the evaluation
NOTE CONF
function.
And my evaluation function here was was the simplest possible
NOTE CONF
thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it also depends on the structure of the
search space and how the evaluation function relates to the
NOTE CONF
search space.
And this diagram sort of shows you what can happen.
NOTE CONF
Um, ignore these, these equations.
Uh, the important thing was these with these pictures.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can think of, um, of best first search
NOTE CONF
as, um, as, as climbing a hill and you're going,
you're always going up.
NOTE CONF
So if you're at a point, if you're at a
point in this space and you want to decide where
NOTE CONF
to go next, and your objective is to get to
the top of the hill, a good heuristic is to
NOTE CONF
go is to go the steepest in the steepest direction.
You can upwards.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then you eventually get up to the top.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that that works.
NOTE CONF
If the search space looks like this, no matter where
you are in this space, if you always follow the
NOTE CONF
heuristic of going the steepest direction upwards, you'll get to
the top.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But if the search space looks like this, this bottom
NOTE CONF
picture.
Okay, when you have a when you have a local
NOTE CONF
maximum which is not a global maximum.
So if you start off over here and you follow
NOTE CONF
the heuristic of going always in the steepest upward direction,
you'll get to this.
NOTE CONF
You'll get to the top here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But if you start over here and you follow that
heuristic, you'll end up at this at this point here,
NOTE CONF
which is the top of a hill, but it's the
top of the smaller hill, okay.
NOTE CONF
And you would never you would never think to go
down and then up again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If your heuristic is simply always go upwards as deeply
NOTE CONF
as possible.
Okay, so like I say, uh, how well this works
NOTE CONF
is it's affected by the, the evaluation function and the
shape of the search space.
NOTE CONF
And in general, um, you don't know the shape of
the search space.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can maybe guess and you can also see
local bits of it when you're doing a search, but
NOTE CONF
you can't see the whole thing at once.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
And so that was a kind of lightning, um, introduction
NOTE CONF
to, um, searching in trees.
Um, if you go on in informatics and you do,
NOTE CONF
um, courses in AI and so forth, there's a lot
more to say about search than what I've said here,
NOTE CONF
but it's a a first glimpse.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So thanks for your attention.
And I'll see you on Tuesday, Monday, Monday.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Did you get your thing to work?